
    LAMB Slaughtering, Cutting, Preserving, and Cooking on the Farm

                 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
                    FARMERS’ BULLETIN NUMBER 2264
                PREPARED BY AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH SERVICE




                               CONTENTS

          Selection and care of animal before slaughter    3
          Preparing for slaughter                          4
          Slaughter                                        6
          Chilling the carcass                            21
          Cutting                                         22
          Freezing and frozen storage                     38
          Meat cookery                                    38
          Preserving lamb pelts                           40




                             PRECAUTIONS

                              The Law

The Federal Meat Inspection Act requires that all meat which is to be
sold or traded for human consumption must be slaughtered under
inspection in an approved facility under the supervision of a State or
USDA meat inspector. A person can slaughter his animals outside such a
facility only for use by him, members of his household, his nonpaying
guests and employees. He is not allowed to sell any portion of the
carcass. For more details about these regulations, consult your county
extension agent or write to the Animal and Plant Health Inspection
Service, United States Department of Agriculture, Washington D.C. 20250.


This bulletin supersedes Farmers’ Bulletin 2152, “Slaughtering,
Cutting, and Processing Lamb and Mutton on the Farm.”

     Washington, D.C.                           Issued August 1977

              For sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
              U.S. Government Printing Office
              Washington, D.C. 20402
              Stock No. 001-000-03709-9




    Lamb Slaughtering, Cutting, Preserving and Cooking on the Farm

  By H. Russell Cross, _Research Food Technologist_,[1] Curtis Green,
  _Meat Marketing Specialist_,[2] William R. Jones, _Extension Meat
  Specialist_,[3] Roger L. West, Associate Professor, Meat Science,[4]
  and Anthony W. Kotula, _Chief, Meat Science Research Laboratory_, [1]
  (Photographs by Donald K. Rough[1] and Terry K. O’Driscoll[5])

  [1] Meat Science Research Laboratory, Northeastern Region,
      Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville, MD. 20705.

  [2] Standardization Branch, Livestock Division, Agricultural
      Marketing Service, Washington, D.C. 20250.

  [3] Cooperative Extension Service, Auburn University,
      Auburn, AL. 36830.

  [4] Department of Animal Science, University of Florida,
      Gainesville, FL. 32611.

  [5] Beltsville Agricultural Research Center, Northeastern Region,
      Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville, MD. 20705.




           SELECTION AND CARE OF ANIMAL BEFORE SLAUGHTER

Several factors should be considered before slaughtering a lamb for
home consumption. The most important considerations are health, care
of the animal prior to slaughter, kind of animal (lamb or mutton), and
expected meat yield.


                                Health

One should take care that an unhealthy animal is not selected for
slaughter. At the time of selection, look for signs of sickness such
as fever, increased breathing rate and diarrhea. Animals suspected of
being unhealthy should be treated by a veterinarian until the animal
is returned to a healthy state.


                             Animal Care

To obtain high-quality meat, it is important to exercise proper care
of the animal prior to slaughter. Pen the animal in a clean, dry place
the day before slaughtering. Restrict the animal from feed 24 hours
prior to slaughter, but provide access to water at all times.
Withholding feed results in greater ease of evisceration (because the
gastrointestinal tract is smaller) and minimizes the migration of
ingested bacteria from the gastrointestinal tract into the blood
stream. Access to water enhances complete bleeding, results in
brighter colored lean in the carcass, and enhances pelt removal.


                      Animal Type and Meat Yield

Animal age will have a sufficient effect on the palatability of the
cooked product. Carcasses from sheep are classed as lamb (12 to 14
months or less), yearling mutton (14 to 24 months), or mutton (over 2
years) on the basis of differences that occur in the development of
their muscular and skeletal systems. Differences in palatability
between the lamb and mutton meat are substantial. Meat from mutton
carcasses has a very intense flavor which is undesirable to some
individuals. Mutton is seldom marketed as retail cuts but rather as
soup stock or in further processed meat items.

A meat-type lamb carcass, when cut and trimmed according to the
methods described later, will yield over 70 percent of its carcass
weight in major trimmed cuts. Expected yields of retail cuts from a
yield grade 2 (trim) and a yield grade 4 (wasty) carcass are presented
in table 1.

       _TABLE 1—Comparison of yield of retail cuts between USDA
               yield 2 and yield grade 4 lamb carcasses_
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
                                     Percentage of carcass weight

  Closely trimmed                 ---------------------------------
  retail cuts                       Yield grade 2    Yield grade 4
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
  Leg, short cut....................     22.2             19.4
  Sirloin...........................      6.4              5.8
  Short loin........................     10.1              9.5
  Rack..............................      7.9              7.5
  Shoulder..........................     23.8             21.6
  Neck..............................      2.1              1.9
  Breast............................      9.8              9.8
  Foreshank.........................      3.4              3.2
  Flank (boneless stew).............      2.3              2.3
  Kidney............................      0.5              0.5
  Fat...............................      8.2             15.4
  Bone..............................      3.3              3.1
                                  ---------------------------------
      Total.........................    100.0            100.0
  ------------------------------------------------------------------
    Adapted from Smith, King, and Carpenter, 1975.




                      PREPARING FOR SLAUGHTER

Prior to the day of slaughter, select the slaughter site, accumulate
all equipment, prepare for waste disposal, and, if necessary, make
arrangements with a local processor or meat market for chilling and
cutting the carcass. If you plan to have the carcass chilled and cut
up, arrangements should be made concerning the time and day on which
the carcass can be accepted, the charges and specific instructions for
chilling, cutting, wrapping, and freezing the carcass.

                           Site Selection

Selection of the slaughter site is extremely important. A site with
clean running water is best. If a tree is to be used, a healthy limb,
6 to 8 inches in diameter, which is 8 to 10 feet from the ground is
needed. This will ensure that the limb will not break from the weight
of the carcass and the carcass can be fully extended from the ground
for pelting and viscera removal. If slaughter is to be done in a barn,
be sure that a strong beam 8 to 10 feet from the floor is available.
The floor should be clean, and preferably, concrete.

After selection of the slaughter site, clean up the area to ensure
that leaves and dirt are not blown on the carcass during slaughter. If
the site has a wooden or concrete floor, wash the floor and all
equipment with plenty of soap and water. Be sure to rinse thoroughly
because sanitizers discolor the meat and may cause off flavors. If
slaughtering is to be done outdoors, use straw to cover the area where
the carcass will be pelted and eviscerated.

The weather on the day of slaughter should also be considered. During
hot weather, slaughter is best performed during the early morning or
late evening hours. Since an inexperienced person will take 1 to 2
hours to complete the slaughter operation, care should be taken to
preclude long exposure to high temperatures. During cold weather of
less than 35° F, slaughter can be done at any time, since spoilage
bacteria do not grow as rapidly in a cold environment. Slaughter
during high winds will result in dirt and other contaminants being
blown onto the carcass.


                           Waste Disposal

All waste products should be disposed of in a sanitary manner. If the
work is to be done in the open, one should select a site with good
drainage so that blood and water can drain away from the carcass.
Blood and water must not be allowed to pollute nearby streams or other
water supplies.

Disposal of viscera is often a problem. Arrangements should be made to
have a local processor or rendering plant pick it up. If this is not
possible, it should be buried so that dogs and other animals cannot
dig it up.


                         Slaughter Equipment

Elaborate and expensive equipment is not necessary, but certain items
are essential (fig. 1). The following slaughter equipment is
recommended:

  1. .22-caliber rifle or pistol with long or long rifle cartridges.
  2. Sharp boning knife and steel.
  3. Block and tackle or strong rope.
  4. Oil or water stone.
  5. Ample clean water for washing hands, carcass, and by products.
  6. Tree with strong limb, beam, or tripod 8 to 10 feet high.
  7. Buckets (two or three).
  8. Ice or cold water.
  9. Straw for placing under animal during pelting and evisceration.
  10. Clean cloths or plastic for protection of meat during transport.
  11. Clean string.

  [Illustration: Rifle, knives, meat saw, scrapers, gambrel, hook]
  Figure 1.—Equipment for slaughter.

Be sure that all equipment which will come in contact with meat is
thoroughly cleaned. Most people get blood and other material on their
outer garments during slaughter, which should not be transferred to
the carcass after it is washed. If weather permits, wear short sleeve
shirts and wash arms and hands frequently to prevent contamination.

Additional equipment needed for cutting the carcass is discussed in
the section on carcass cutting.




                              SLAUGHTER

                              Stunning

The animal should be properly secured to a tree or strong post and
killed as quickly and humanely as possible. Stun the animal with a
well directed bullet (.22 caliber rifle or pistol) in the forehead,
midway between and slightly above the eyes (fig. 2). Make the first
shot count since a careless shot can cause the animal much pain or
injure helpers. As with the use of any firearms, normal precautions
should be taken when stunning the animal.

  [Illustration: Rifle muzzle pointed at forehead of sheep]
  Figure 2.—Stunning.


                              Bleeding

Bleeding should be done as quickly as possible after the animal is
down, using a straight boning knife and holding the animal in position
with the knee on or behind the shoulder. Grasp the lower jaw with the
left hand, pull the head back and insert the knife just back of the
jaw where the angle is made (fig. 3). With the cutting edge to the
outside, insert the knife as close to the neck bone as possible. Cut
clear through and then outward, severing the windpipe, gullet and
blood vessels (fig. 4).

  [Illustration: Man inserting knife near the jaw of the sheep]
  Figure 3.—Bleeding.

  [Illustration: Man finishing the cut of the sheep’s neck]
  Figure 4.—Bleeding.


                            Pelt Removal

Hands and equipment must be kept clean in order to produce a clean
carcass. Dirt and wool on the carcass are very difficult to remove and
usually have to be trimmed. Make certain there is a good supply of
clean water available at all times. Also, pelting (fisting) is much
easier if the hands are kept slightly wet.

_Legs, Breast and Midline_.—The pelt can be opened around the legs and
along the midline and breast from the horizontal or suspended
position. The procedure selected depends on personal preference and
the equipment available.

_Horizontal method_.—Place the animal on its back on a clean floor
(concrete, slate, or piece of plywood) (fig. 5). Standing to one side
of the lamb, hold one front leg between your knees and allow the lamb
to lean away. Remove a narrow strip of skin down the front of the
foreleg, being sure to remove the skin over the knee (fig. 6). Turn
the knife (with the cutting edge toward the skin) and make an opening
to the neck in front of the breast (fig. 7). Make certain to cut
toward the skin to avoid cutting through the thin membrane (fell)
covering the outside of the carcass. If this membrane is broken, the
lean muscles will bulge through and give the carcass an unattractive
appearance.

  [Illustration: Sheep lying supine on a plywood sheet]
  Figure 5.—Horizontal position.

  [Illustration: Man cutting pelt off front leg using a knife]
  Figure 6.—Skinning foreleg.

  [Illustration: Man cutting pelt up leg to breast using a knife]
  Figure 7.—Skinning neck.

Skin the opposite leg the same way, meeting the cut made in front of
the breast. Open the pelt down the neck to the opening made by
sticking (fig. 8). This will form a V-shaped strip of pelt over the
breast. Remove the pelt over the breast by pulling the pelt up and
back. Once started, it is best to complete by fisting. Push the fist
under the pelt with the knuckles next to the carcass and the thumb
over the first finger (fig. 9). Press the fist up against the skin
working it away from the carcass. Work slowly and avoid tearing
through the fell and muscles. After the pelt is loosened over the
brisket (fig. 10), stop and skin out the rear legs.

  [Illustration: Man using knife to skin up to neck]
  Figure 8.—Skinning neck.

  [Illustration: Man pulling up on pelt on breast]
  Figure 9.—Fisting brisket.

  [Illustration: Man pulling up on pelt, peeling it back away from head]
  Figure 10.—Fisting brisket.

Stretching the rear legs, remove a strip of skin down the back of the
leg and over the hock (fig. 11). With the leg still between your
knees, turn the knife outward and open the skin from the hock to a
point in front of the anus (fig. 12). Skin around the hock and down
the shank. Remove the foot at the last joint (the one next to the
hoof). See fig. 13. Follow the same procedure on the other leg and
then fist the pelt off the inside of the legs and over the crotch
(fig. 14).

  [Illustration: Man cutting pelt off hindleg using a knife]
  Figure 11.—Skinning hindleg.

  [Illustration: Man cutting up leg to anus using a knife]
  Figure 12.—Cutting to midline.

  [Illustration: Man cutting off foot using a knife]
  Figure 13.—Removing foot.

  [Illustration: Pelt partially removed]
  Figure 14.—Fisting over inside of legs.

From the breast, fist down the belly and around the navel to the
opening at the crotch (fig. 15). The carcass is now ready to be hung.

  [Illustration: Man pushing hand down between pelt and carcass]
  Figure 15.—Fisting down belly.

Tie a heavy cord around the hindlegs, and suspend the carcass. The
point of hanging should be approximately seven feet from the ground to
provide a good working height.

_Suspended method_.—Tie a heavy string around one of the rear legs and
suspend the carcass (fig. 16). On the leg not suspended, remove a
strip of skin over the hock and past the dew-claws (fig. 17). Turn the
knife outward and open the skin from the hock to a point in front of
the anus. Skin around the hock and down the shank (fig. 18). Remove the
foot at the last joint.

  [Illustration: Sheep hung up by one rear leg]
  Figure 16.—Suspended carcass.

  [Illustration: Man slicing pelt away from lower hindleg near hoof]
  Figure 17.—Skinning hindleg.

  [Illustration: Man slicing pelt away from upper hindleg]
  Figure 18.—Skinning hindleg.

Remove a strip of skin along the suspended leg and cut the skin from
the hock towards the anus, connecting with the cut from the other leg
(fig. 19). Remove the skin around the shank. Fist along the cut
between the legs, removing the pelt around the back of the legs, in
the crotch and around the front of the legs. Suspend the carcass by
the opposite leg and remove the foot on the loosened leg. Tie a heavy
cord around both rear legs and suspend the carcass (fig. 20).

  [Illustration: Sheep hung up by one rear leg]
  Figure 19.—Skinning hindleg.

  [Illustration: Sheep hung up by both rear legs using a single rope]
  Figure 20.—Both legs tied.

Remove a strip of skin along the back of the front legs from the knee
to the foot (fig. 21). Make a split in the pelt beginning at each knee
and connecting at the neck in front of the breast. Open the pelt down
the neck to the opening made by sticking (fig. 22).

  [Illustration: Man slicing across front leg just above the hoof]
  Figure 21.—Skinning foreleg.

  [Illustration: Man slicing pelt away from breast using a knife]
  Figure 22.—Opening pelt to neck.

Remove the pelt over the breast by pulling the pelt up and back (fig.
23). Once started, it is best to complete by fisting. Fist along the
belly and around the flanks, meeting the opening made at the rear legs
(fig. 24).

  [Illustration: Man sliding hand between pelt and chest]
  Figure 23.—Fisting brisket.

  [Illustration: Man sliding hand between pelt and belly]
  Figure 24.—Fisting belly.

_Sides and back_.—Open the pelt down the midline of the belly and
loosen the navel. Hold the pelt tight with one hand and fist off the
sides, work around to the back, and up around the hindlegs (fig. 25).
If the fell is broken try to work around the break to get a new start.
Fist down past the shoulder, around the sides and up over the rump.
From underneath the hock, push up until the pelt hangs by the skin
that is fastened to the tail and anus (fig. 26). It will be necessary
to use a knife to remove the pelt around the tail (fig. 27). Carefully
skin around the tail and allow the pelt to drop (fig. 28).

  [Illustration: Man sliding hand between pelt and sides]
  Figure 25.—Fisting side and back.

  [Illustration: Man pulling pelt up and away from back]
  Figure 26.—Pulling pelt up.

  [Illustration: Man slicing pelt around tail using a knife]
  Figure 27.—Skinning around tail.

  [Illustration: Pelt laying on ground at head of suspended animal]
  Figure 28.—Let pelt drop.

The front feet can be removed by cutting through the joint at the knee
(fig. 29) or by breaking them at the “break” or “spool” joints. To
break the legs at the “break” or “spool” joint, cut across the tendon
between the knee and foot (fig. 30), grasp the foot in one hand, the
leg in the other, and break back and sideways. On young lambs the
“break” joint will snap easily and the foot can be removed. On older
lambs, it will be necessary to cut across the pastern joint and twist
the toes off. This joint is called the “spool” joint (fig. 31). Wash
the carcass thoroughly before eviscerating. Remove the head at the
joint closest to the head (fig. 32).

  [Illustration: Man slicing through front knee joint using a knife]
  Figure 29.—Removing foreleg.

  [Illustration: Man slicing off front foot using a knife]
  Figure 30.—Removing front foot at spool joint.

  [Illustration: Sliced spool joint]
  Figure 31.—Spool joint.

  [Illustration: Man slicing through neck using a knife]
  Figure 32.—Removing head.


                            Evisceration

Loosen the large intestine by cutting around the rectum deep into
the pelvic canal (fig. 33). Pull the rectum outward cutting any
remaining attachments. Tie a piece of string around the large
intestine near its opening and let it drop into the pelvic cavity
(fig. 34). In lamb or mutton the pelvic bone is not separated.

  [Illustration: Man using knife around anus]
  Figure 33.—Loosening anus.

  [Illustration: Man tying shut anus]
  Figure 34.—Tying anus.

Locate the end of the sternum (fig. 35) and split the breastbone with
a knife or saw (fig. 36). Do not cut into the body cavity. Make a cut
through the cod or udder into the pelvic cavity. Make this opening
large enough to insert the hand. Insert the knife handle inside the
body cavity and with the blade extended outward, open the body cavity
to the opening made at the brisket (fig. 37). Allow the paunch and
intestines to roll out and hang. Do not allow them to fall as the
esophagus will tear and spill its contents onto the carcass. Find the
loosened large intestine, and pull it down past the kidneys, leaving
the kidneys intact (fig. 38). Remove the liver by reaching behind and
pulling it while cutting the connective tissue (fig. 39). Examine it
for any abscesses (yellow or white pus) or scar tissue. Remove the
gall bladder from the liver by cutting beneath it and pulling (fig.
40). Be careful not to allow its contents to spill on the liver.

  [Illustration: Man locating the tip of sternum with fingers]
  Figure 35.—Locating breastbone.

  [Illustration: Man cutting through breastbone with saw]
  Figure 36.—Splitting.

  [Illustration: Man pushing knife down through abdomen wall]
  Figure 37.—Opening midline.

  [Illustration: Man pulling out large intestine]
  Figure 38.—Removing large intestine.

  [Illustration: Man slicing out liver using a knife]
  Figure 39.—Removing liver.

  [Illustration: Man slicing gall bladder off liver using a knife]
  Figure 40.—Removing gall bladder.

Pull the paunch and intestines outward and cut through the diaphragm
(the thin sheet of muscle and white connective tissue that separates
the lungs and heart from the stomach and intestines). Make this cut at
the edge of the thin muscle (fig. 41). Sever the large artery at the
backbone and pull downward, removing the heart, lungs, and windpipe
with the paunch and intestines (fig. 42).

  [Illustration: Man slicing down through diaphragm using a knife]
  Figure 41.—Cutting diaphragm.

  [Illustration: Man slicing viscera away from backbone using a knife]
  Figure 42.—Completing evisceration.

Cut across the top of the heart and separate it from the lungs. Wash
the heart and liver carefully in cold water and place them on ice to
chill.

Remove the kidneys and kidney fat and wash the inside of the body
cavity thoroughly (fig. 43). Rewash the outside and move to the
chilling location.

  [Illustration: Man rinsing out body cavity with garden hose]
  Figure 43.—Washing.


                        Examining the Carcass

All the internal organs and the dressed carcass should be examined
carefully for any abnormalities or conditions that might affect the
fitness of the meat for food. Usually, a meat inspector or graduate
veterinarian is the only person qualified to do this, but under farm
conditions it becomes necessary for you to look for the obvious signs
of disease or damage. If any part of the viscera or carcass is
questionable, you should obtain expert advice.

Bruises, minor injuries, parasites in the organs, and enclosed
abscesses, and single tumors are frequently local conditions that can
be easily removed. However, the presence of congestion or inflammation
of the lungs, intestines, kidneys, inner surface of chest or abdominal
cavity and numerous yellowish or pearl-like growths scattered
throughout the organs should be viewed seriously. Carcasses and
viscera having such abnormalities should be examined by a graduate
veterinarian and his opinion obtained as to the wholesomeness of the
meat. You should check with a cooperating veterinarian before
slaughtering the animal to be certain he will be available if you
should seek his advice.




                        CHILLING THE CARCASS

Following evisceration, the lamb carcass should be carefully trimmed
and any pieces of adhering skin, wool, bruises, hair, or manure
removed. Lamb carcasses are not split longitudinally because they are
not thick enough in any dimension to create cooling problems.

The surfaces of freshly slaughtered lamb carcasses are contaminated
with bacteria that can spoil the meat unless their growth is promptly
checked. Bacterial growth can be slowed by prompt chilling and keeping
the carcass at low temperatures. If the weather is suitable (28° to
35° F), the carcass can be wrapped in a sheet, hung and chilled in a
well ventilated shed. Wrapping with clean cloth will partially protect
the carcass from contamination.

_Do not_ allow the carcass to freeze because freezing within one day
after death may toughen the meat. If the carcass cannot be chilled to
below 40° F on the farm, it should be transported to the local locker
plant or market for chilling. The need for prompt and thorough
chilling of warm carcasses cannot be over-emphasized. The carcass can
be cut into retail cuts after the carcass has been chilled for 24 to
48 hours.




                              CUTTING

Use the following guidelines to determine cutting and packaging
instructions for the processor if the carcass is not cut and wrapped
on the farm.

_Chops_.—Those from young animals can be broiled or pan fried and
should be at least ¾ to 1 inch thick. The loin and rib chops are
relatively small and it takes two or three to comprise a serving.
Those from the sirloin and shoulder are larger and only one chop may
suffice. Allow ¾ of a pound bone-in per person (uncooked) as a guide.

_Roasts_.—Allow ¾ pound per serving for bone-in roasts (leg,
shoulder) and ½ pound per serving for boneless roast (bone and
rolled shoulder).

_Ground lamb and stew_.—Allow ½ pound per serving.


                      Carcass Cutting Equipment

Elaborate and expensive equipment is not necessary, but certain items
are essential. The following equipment is recommended:

  1. Steel.
  2. Boning knife.
  3. Meat saw.
  4. Freezer paper (see section on “wrapping”).
  5. Freezer tape.
  6. Meat grinder (electric or hand powered).


                         Cutting the Carcass

Begin cutting the lamb carcass by removing the thin cuts—the breast,
flank, and foreleg. Lay the carcass on its side and mark a cutting
line from the elbow joint of the foreleg to the front part of the
hindleg. Most of the flank can be removed by starting the cut between
the legs at the cod or udder fat where the flank begins. Figure 44
shows this cut made in a straight line from the front of the hindleg
to the elbow joint. More of the rear flank and lower ribs can be
removed by making the cut higher, near the hindleg. However, the cut
across the lower shoulder should be as close to the joint on the
foreleg as possible to leave the shoulder roast large.

  [Illustration: Man sawing off flank]
  Figure 44.—Steamling.

After removing the thin cuts from both sides, remove the kidneys,
kidney fat, and diaphragm (fig. 45), if not removed at slaughter. Turn
the carcass over on to the cut surfaces and remove the neck. Cross
sectional cuts make neck chops, which should be braised; or the neck
may be cut off flush with the top of the shoulder and added to stew or
ground lamb (figs. 46 and 47).


  [Illustration: Kidneys with fat attached lying next to carcass]
  Figure 45.—Kidney and kidney fat.

  [Illustration: Man sawing through neck]
  Figure 46.—Neck chops or slices.

  [Illustration: Neck chops lying next to carcass]
  Figure 47.—Neck chops or slices.

The trimmed carcass is separated into four primal cuts, each with
different characteristics (figs. 48 and 49). A cut between the fifth
and sixth ribs removes the shoulder. Another cut between the 12th and
13th (last) rib separates the rib from the loin (the 13th rib remains
in the loin). The loin and legs are separated just in front of the
hipbones by cutting through the small of the back where the curve of
the leg muscles blend into the loin. This is the cut being made in
  Figure 48.

  [Illustration: Man making third saw cut across carcass]
  Figure 48.—Preparing four primal cuts.

  [Illustration: Carcass cut into four pieces]
  Figure 49.—Preparing four primal cuts.

Split the legs through the center of the backbone (fig. 50). Trim the
flank and cod or udder fat off (fig. 51). Remove the backbone from the
leg by making a saw cut approximately parallel to the split surface of
the backbone and 1 inch below this surface (fig. 52). Saw
approximately 1 inch deep, or until you feel a slight slippage when
you cut through part of the hipbone.

  [Illustration: Hind quarter split using saw]
  Figure 50.—Splitting legs.

  [Illustration: Leg of lamb and trimmed pieces displayed]
  Figure 51.—Leg of lamb.

  [Illustration: Saw separating backbone from leg of lamb]
  Figure 52.—Backbone removal.

Be careful not to saw all the way through the hipbone. Insert a knife
into the saw cut, find the “slip” joint between the bones and cut
underneath the backbone to complete its removal (fig. 53). Cut off the
lower shank bones by sawing where the tendon enters the muscle (fig.
54).

  [Illustration: Knife slicing off backbone using a knife]
  Figure 53.—Backbone removal.

  [Illustration: Saw cutting off lower leg]
  Figure 54.—Removing lower shank.

The leg may be further trimmed by cutting through the knee or “stifle”
joint to remove the shank. This joint is located about halfway between
where the muscles of the shank end and the muscles of the lower leg
begin. Cut into the tissues over the bones until you locate the joint
and work the knife through it (fig. 55). Continue cutting straight
across the heel of the leg.

  [Illustration: Knife slicing through stifle joint using a knife]
  Figure 55.—Stifle joint.

Several sirloin chops may be removed by knife and saw cuts made
parallel to the cut separating the leg from the loin (fig. 56).

  [Illustration: Saw cutting off chops]
  Figure 56.—Sirloin chops.

Split the loin through the center of the backbone and remove the flank
about 1 inch from the loin “eye” (figs. 57 and 58).

  [Illustration: Saw cutting loin in half along backbone]
  Figure 57.—Splitting loin.

  [Illustration: Saw cutting off flank edge]
  Figure 58.—Removing flank edge.

Loin chops are made by cutting perpendicular to the backbone (fig.
59). Usually chops are cut ¾ of an inch to an inch thick. Doubles or
“English” loin chops are made from a loin which has not been split
(fig. 60). The flank portion may be ground or made into stew.

  [Illustration: Saw cutting across loin]
  Figure 59.—Preparing loin chops.

  [Illustration: Loin chops displayed]
  Figure 60.—Loin chops.

Remove the fell membrane from each sirloin, loin, and rib chop before
cooking; the fell becomes hard in frying. When the chop is cold the
fell peels off easily; start peeling at the lower end of the chop
(fig. 61).

  [Illustration: Man pulling membrane away from chop]
  Figure 61.—Removing fell membrane.

Leave the fell on the leg and shoulder roasts to lessen the
evaporation of meat juices. Clean fell on roasts, chops, or stews will
not affect flavor.

The rib should be split somewhat differently than the other primal
cuts (figs. 62 and 63). The backbone is not split but is removed by
cutting through the ribs along the ridge where they join the backbone.
Continue cutting close to the backbone to separate one rib section.
Repeat this cut along the opposite side of the backbone to separate it
from the other rib section. Remove the breast portion by cutting
approximately 2 inches from the rib “eye” (fig. 64).

  [Illustration: Saw cutting through ribs at backbone using a knife]
  Figure 62.—Splitting rib.

  [Illustration: Saw cutting through ribs at backbone]
  Figure 63.—Splitting rib.

  [Illustration: Knife slicing through ribs]
  Figure 64.—Separating breast from rib.

Rib chops are easily made by cutting between the ribs (fig. 65).
Remove the fell before cooking. The breast portion may be barbecued in
one piece or made into riblets by cutting between the ribs (fig. 66).

  [Illustration: Knife slicing rib chops of rib rack]
  Figure 65.—Preparing rib chops.

  [Illustration: Rib chops and breast displayed]
  Figure 66.—Rib chops and breast.

After splitting, the shoulder may be roasted as is, made into chops,
or boned and rolled to make a more easily carved roast (figs. 67 and
68).

  [Illustration: Saw cutting through shoulder]
  Figure 67.—Splitting shoulder.

  [Illustration: Chops and roasts displayed]
  Figure 68.—Shoulder chops and roasts.

Arm chops should be made first by cutting parallel to the surface made
when the foreleg and breast were removed. Only two or three arm chops
should be made (fig. 69). Blade chops are made by cutting between the
ribs and sawing through the blade and backbone.

  [Illustration: Saw cutting through shoulder]
  Figure 69.—Preparing arm chops.

To prepare a boneless shoulder, first remove the ribs and backbone by
cutting closely underneath the ribs following their curvature; then
cutting along and over the backbone and neck vertebrae to remove them
(fig. 70). Start at the rear surface and cut along the lower edge of
the blade bone to lift the underlying muscles exposing the blade bone
and arm bone (fig. 71). Cut along the edges of these bones and then
lift the over-lying meat and cut close to the top surface of these
bones to remove them (fig. 72). The blade bone has a ridge which runs
close to and nearly parallel to its shorter edge. Try not to cut
through the skin surface when cutting over this ridge. The boneless
meat should be rolled so that the shoulder “eye” is lengthwise in the
roast. The shoulder “eye” is located under the flat surface of the
shoulder blade. Roll the meat as tightly as possible, then tie
securely with strong twine or cord (fig. 68). The boneless shoulder
may be made into a pocket roast and stuffed with ground lamb or other
dressing. The edges of the meat are laced together after stuffing.

  [Illustration: Knife slicing off ribs on shoulder]
  Figure 70.—Boning shoulder.

  [Illustration: Knife exposing blade bone]
  Figure 71.—Boning shoulder.

  [Illustration: Display of boneless shoulder and removed bones]
  Figure 72.—Boned shoulder.

The lower shank bones of the foreleg are removed by cutting or sawing
through the joint. The foreleg and hind shank are often barbecued, cut
into stew, or boned, and the meat ground.

The breast can be cut into stew, boned and rolled, ground, or made
into a pocket roast by cutting under and close to the ribs to form a
pocket which can be stuffed. The edges are then laced together (fig.
73).

  [Illustration: Display of breast and foreshank]
  Figure 73.—Breast and foreshank.


                              Wrapping

Immediately after chilling and cutting, meat _must be_ properly
wrapped, quickly frozen, and stored at 0° F or lower until needed.
Proper wrapping is essential to maintain meat quality; therefore, one
should:

  • Use moisture-vapor proof wrap such as heavily waxed freezer
    paper or specifically laminated paper.

  • Prepare convenient family-sized packages.

  • Wrap meat closely, eliminating as much air as possible.

  • Improper wrapping will allow air to enter and result in “freezer
    burn” and rancidity.

  • Use a proper wrapping procedure (fig. 74).

  • Label and date each package properly.

  [Illustration: Drawing showing 5 steps to wrapping meat]
  Figure 74.—Wrapping procedure.




                     FREEZING AND FROZEN STORAGE

When freezing large quantities of meat, it is best to use a commercial
establishment for fast freezing. Since a lamb carcass will yield only
70 to 75 percent usable retail cuts or about 38 pounds from a 50 pound
lamb carcass, the home freezer will adequately handle this amount.
When using the home freezer be sure to:

  • Clean and defrost freezer.

  • Freeze meat at -10° or lower.

  • Freeze only the amount of meat that will freeze in 24 hours.

  • Allow ample air circulation by not overpacking the freezer.

  • In the freezer maintain 0° F or less for storage.

Remember, proper wrapping and freezing does not improve quality but
maintains original quality. It is safe to refreeze meat that has been
kept below 40° F during thawing. However, refreezing is not usually
recommended because there is some loss of meat quality.

Lamb cuts should be utilized within 6 to 9 months after freezing;
ground and stew lamb within 3 to 4 months. Longer storage results in
lowered quality.




                            MEAT COOKERY

Tender cuts of meat are best cooked with dry heat such as broiling,
roasting, and panbroiling. Less tender cuts of meat are tenderized by
cooking with _moist_ heat. Connective tissue is softened and
tenderized by cooking slowly in moisture.

Temperature control is very important in meat cookery. Meat loses
moisture, fat, and other volatile substances during cooking. However,
some of the meat juices and fat may be retained in the pan drippings.

Cooking losses can be controlled by controlling the oven cooking
temperature and final internal temperature of the meat. Shrinkage is
increased when hot oven temperatures are used for cooking and when the
meat is cooked to a higher internal temperature.

The meat thermometer is the most accurate guide to the degree of
doneness of meat. Cooking time can be used as a guide to the degree of
doneness, but this may be influenced by fat and moisture content, and
shape or size of the cut.

Fresh lamb is usually cooked to an internal temperature of 170 to 180° F
(77 to 82° C). Chops or roasts from the leg, loin, back, or shoulder
are suited to dry heat cookery methods such as broiling or roasting.
Other cuts from the lamb carcass such as stew meat, neck slices, lamb
riblets, and shank are best suited to moist cookery methods such as
braising. Lamb should be served hot and not allowed to cool before
serving.

More detailed instructions for cooking procedures can be obtained from
the following sources:

  USDA Beef Slaughtering Bulletin, FB 2209

  USDA Lamb in Family Meals, HG 124

  Lessons on Meat
  National Live Stock and Meat
  Board 36 South Wabash
  Avenue, Chicago, 111. 60603




                       PRESERVING LAMB PELTS

Select pelts for preserving which are free of numerous holes and which
have relatively clean fleece. The day the pelt is removed, wash the
fleece thoroughly with cold water. High pressure water can be used if
the fleece is extremely dirty. Remove any large pieces of connective
tissue or flesh adhering to the pelt. In a cool, dry shelter or
building, spread the pelt, wool down, on the floor and cover with an
even layer of salt. A small amount of alum can be added to the salt.

Take care to put salt on all the edges. Salted pelts may be piled on
top of one another, all pelts fleece down. Curing time should be 15 to
30 days. Check the salt covering weekly. After curing, the pelt can be
scraped to remove connective tissue or flesh. Neatsfoot oil can be
rubbed into the pelt to make it soft and flexible. The fleece can be
combed and brushed.



                   ☆ U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1977 O-244-090




------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES

 1. Silently corrected typographical errors and variations in spelling.
 2. Illustrations replaced with the text ‘[Illustration]’ or
    ‘[Illustration: some descriptive text]’. The illustration caption
    is on the following line. Due to the instructional nature of this
    text, extensive illustration descriptions have been added to this
    text only version.
 3. The original was printed in two column text with illustrations
    sometimes spanning both columns. In order to reduce ambiguity, the
    illustrations have been moved adjacent to the paragraph that refers
    to them.
 4. Footnotes have been renumbered.
 5. Italicised words are enclosed by _underscores_.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lamb Slaughtering, Cutting,
Preserving, and Cooking on , by H. Russell Cross and E. Curtis Green and William R. Jones and Roger L. West and Anthony W. Kotula

